JUDY WOODRUFF: And back to
the battle over health care.
I spoke a short time ago with
Republican Senator Rand Paul of
Kentucky, one of the key votes
that could determine the
future of the GOP effort to
repeal and replace Obamacare.
Senator Paul, thank you
very much for joining us.
Is there any doubt in your
mind, if the vote had gone ahead
today or tomorrow, that the
bill would have failed?
SEN.
RAND PAUL (R), Kentucky:
Yes, I don't think there were
enough votes, but I think there
also just hasn't been enough
time to have a full discussion.
We just got the bill last week.
We just got the CBO
score on Monday.
So, there needs to be a little
bit more time to absorb this,
then also to discuss, what
are the changes that the
leadership might be open to
in order to get it to pass?
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, speaking
of that, you met with President
Trump at the White House
earlier today.
You tweeted after your meeting,
you said: "@realDonaldTrump
is open to making the bill
better.
Is the Senate leadership?"
My question to you is -- and
the president is meeting now
with the rest of the Republicans
in the Senate -- what
changes does the president
want to see in this bill?
SEN.
RAND PAUL: Well, I don't
think it's so much him
lobbing us for changes.
It's us asking him for help
in getting the changes done.
I think he has the bully pulpit.
He has a great deal of influence
with the Republican Party
on both the House and the
Senate side.
And I think the bill right now
to the conservative point of
view doesn't have enough repeal.
In fact, it looks like we're
keeping a lot of Obamacare.
Even the architect of Obamacare,
Jonathan Gruber, said, hey,
hey, guys, don't worry,
we're actually
keeping Obamacare.
So we actually think that
there needs to be more repeal.
That's the message
I took to him.
But I also took a specific list
that we're sending to Senate
leadership, and we're saying,
if you address these items,
there's a possibility we could
vote for this bill, but it's got
to look more like repeal and
less like we're keeping it.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, as you
know, what the president has
said about the House version
of the bill, which many people
said was tougher than the Senate
bill, he said it was mean,
and he wanted a bill
with more heart.
So where are we on this?
SEN.
RAND PAUL: You know, I think
there are various ways you can
characterize both Republican
and Democrat proposals.
President Obama, I think,
wanted what was best for the
country, but I think it didn't
work well.
I think we have the
death spiral, and I think
particularly premiums
in the individual market
are going through the roof.
I think Republicans want what's
best for the country also,
but I think they're not fixing
the death spiral of Obamacare.
They're going to subsidize it
with a lot of taxpayer money.
So, characterizing something as
mean or generous I think goes
to people's motives, and I think
it is sort of why we have
such an angry country now.
We think that people
have ill motives.
But I think Republicans want
people to have health insurance.
We want people to be healthy.
So do Democrats.
We just believe in a
different type of economic
system or different
types of limitations of
government or more expansive
government and how we can do it.
JUDY WOODRUFF: One of the
things, Senator Paul, you have
talked about wanting to do
away with is the Obamacare
tax on individuals making
over $250,000 a year.
That would be money -- that's
the money that's been used to
pay for many of the subsidies
for people with lower income.
SEN.
RAND PAUL: Right.
JUDY WOODRUFF: It's a transfer,
taking money away from those
who have more to give it to
people who have less,
but that troubles you?
SEN.
RAND PAUL: No, we already
do quite a bit of that,
and it's call Medicaid.
The problem or the
fundamental flaw of
Obamacare was that they put
regulations on the insurance,
about 12 regulations,
which increased the
cost of the insurance.
And so President Obama wanted
to help poor, working-class
people, but he actually hurts
them by making the insurance
too expensive to want to buy.
I had someone at the house
just recently was doing some
work, and he said: "Oh, my son
doesn't have insurance,
he's paying the penalty
because it's too expensive."
So, President Obama said,
oh, we want to make insurance
perfect for people, but he added
all these regulatory mandates,
made it too expensive.
Young, healthy people didn't
buy it, and the people remaining
in the insurance pool were
sicker and sicker.
That's the adverse selection and
the death spiral of Obamacare.
And so really we do need
to discuss the intricacies
of what worked and what
didn't work in Obamacare.
And I think the better way to
do this is to let individuals
have the freedom to choose
what kind of insurance
is best for them.
The government doesn't
always know best.
Maybe the individual should
be allowed to choose.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Senator, I
hear you, and I have read of
some of the other comments you
have made lately.
You have some very
strong views on this.
As you just said, you would
like to do away with this tax
on individuals earning -- high
earners.
You have talked about doing away
with the mandates in Obamacare.
You talk about health
savings accounts.
But other members of the Senate,
including other Republicans,
have very different ideas.
They are worried about
these Medicaid cuts
in this legislation.
SEN.
RAND PAUL: Right.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Where
is the common ground?
SEN.
RAND PAUL: Well, that's
what we're going to
see, if we can find it.
One of the things that horrifies
me is that we would be giving
taxpayer money to very,
very wealthy corporations.
The insurance companies make
about $15 billion a year.
They have doubled their
profit margin under Obamacare.
And so now we're going to take
a lot of this and call it a
stabilization fund, but really
it's a bailout of
insurance companies.
And I just think that's wrong.
I just can't see why
ordinary, average taxpayers
would be giving money
to very, very wealthy
corporations.
An analogous situation would
be this: We all complain
that new cars cost too much.
Why don't we have a new car
stabilization fund and give
$130 billion to car companies?
JUDY WOODRUFF: Right.
SEN.
RAND PAUL: We could do that
in any industry, but it's
not really good economics.
What it is, is, you're simply
transferring money from the
ordinary, average taxpayers
to very wealthy corporations.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But, Senator,
my understanding is that plan
was put in there to take care
of some of those people at
the lower income level because
of these changes in Medicaid.
I still don't see where the
middle ground is between you,
other Republicans, and certainly
with Democrats.
SEN.
RAND PAUL: Actually, the
money in the stabilization
fund, $130 billion which
I call an insurance
bailout, is put in to try to
cure the adverse selection that
Obamacare created by making
insurance too expensive.
Healthy people didn't buy it.
They tried to fix this by
forcing young people to buy it
through an individual mandate.
Even that didn't work.
So the way the Republicans
fix it is they don't
actually fix it.
They subsidize it.
So we have to fix what
went wrong with Obamacare,
not just recapitulate
something that's broken.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What you're
saying makes it sound like
you're still uncertain this is
going to pass.
SEN.
RAND PAUL: Yes.
I'm uncertain whether it's
going to be enough of a
repeal bill for conservatives.
And we need to adhere
to our promise.
We promised people
we'd repeal it.
We talked about all the
problems of Obamacare.
We shouldn't leave half
of it in place and expect
things to be better.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Senator Rand
Paul of Kentucky, we thank you.
SEN.
RAND PAUL: Thank you.